# Architectures and Patterns for Unity Projects

## Dependency Injection

A light-weight example of dependency injection using `[Provide]` and `[Inject]` attributes.
The system relies on the[attributes and reflection](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/advanced-topics/reflection-and-attributes/) in .NET System.

### Attributes

- `ProvideAttribute` Providing dependencies. Any instances marked as `[Provide]` attribute, it is expected to be supplied with an instance of dependency.
- `InjectAttribute` Injecting dependencies. Any field or method marked as `[Inject]` attribute can expect to have the dependency satisfied by the system.

### Services

- `ServiceA` has `Initialze` method, consums and outputs a message on the console.
- `ServiceB` has `Initialze` method, consums and outputs a message on the console.
- `FactoryA` has a field to cache a `ServiceA` instance. `CreateServiceA()` only creats a new instance if the cache is null.

### Interfaces

- `IDependencyProvider` is a contract for identifying a type. It knows which classes in the system can provide dependencies.

### Components

- `ClassA` contains `ServiceA` and has an `Inject` method `Init` that accepts and assigns an instance of `ServiceA` into the field.

- `ClassB` contains both `Injuect` field attribute as for `ServiceA` and `ServiceB`, for variaty purposes. `FactoryA` follows `Inject` method attribute by using `Init` method.

- `Injector` finding and satisfying dependencies. All instances will be Monobehaviours.

  1. `Injector` utilizes reflection's `BindingFlags` to find the desired denpendency providers.
  2. To automatically find all dependency providers, take advantage of Unity's `FindMonoBehaviour` method to find all providers marked as `IDependencyProvider`
  3. `Injector` has a dictionary for registering the dependency providers and their return types. Once the providers are found, they can be invoked with optional parameters.
  4. A helper function `IsInjectable` returns any fields marked as `[Inject]`. Using `FindMonoBehaviour().Where()` to look for any injectable fields inside a MonoBehaviour object.
  5. `IsInjectable` uses `GetType().GetFeilds()` to find field `[Inject]` marks.
  6. `Any()` and `Where()` ([Know more about them](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3703256/linq-extension-methods-any-vs-where-vs-exists)) are LINQ extention methods.`Any()` return a boolean (wheter or not any items match). `Where()` returns a new sequence of items matching the predicate.
  7. `Inject` method in `Injector` finds `[Inject]` marks in object fields by using `type.GetFields()`, resolve the provider type and assigns the instance to the `[Inject]` field instance.
  8. Similarly, `Inject` finds method `[Inject]` marks by using `type.GetMethods()`. These methods accept injectables as parameters. The query is using LINQ `Select()` to find matching parameter types and return them as an array.
  9. Addtionally, to find injectable properties using `type.GetProperties()'. Injectable properties are referred to as members have getters and setters.
  10. `Resovle` helps determine if the provider instance is registered.
  11. For injectable fields use `SetValue()` to assign instances. For injectable methods use `Invoke()` to call them.
  12. Set `Injector` class Attribute as `[DefaultExecutionOrder(<negative number>)]` will allow injector instantiated before any other objects.

- `Provider` supplies dependencies to the injection system. All instances will be Monobehaviours. Can supply itself as references.

- `Environment` provides itself as a dependency.
  
  1. This goes without letting `Factory` creating new instances. Simply use `Provide` Attribute on `ProvideEnvironmentSystem()` and let it returns itself as an instance.
  2. Best to combine with `Singleton`, that will allow autogenerated instance if one doesn't exist in the project.
  3. `Initialize()` outputs a message.

### Utilities

- `Singleton` inherits from `MonoBehaviour`. It attempts to find existing object that has the same Component. If not create one and attach a new Component of the same Type.

### Code Snippets

- Provide an instance through a provider.

```csharp
class Provider{
    [Provide]
    public IService ProvideService() {
        return new Service();
    }
}
```

- Self Provide

```csharp
class SelfProvider: IDependencyProvider, ISelfProvider{
    [Provide]
    public ISelfProvider ProvideSelf(){
        return this;
    }
}
```

`ISelfProvider` can be marked as `[Inject]` in other consumers as fields, method parameters or properties.

- Field Injection

```csharp
class Consumer{
    // A established provider can 
    [Inject] private IService _service;
}
```

- Method Injection

```csharp
class Consumer{
    private IService _service;
    [Inject]
    public void Init(IService service){
        _service = service;
    }
}
```

- Property Injection

```csharp
class Consumer{
    [Inject] public IService Service {get; private set; }
}
```

- Miltiple Injections

```csharp
class Consumer{
    private IService _service;
    private IFactory _factory;

    [Inject]
    public void Init(IService service, IFactory factory){
        _service = service;
        _factory = factory;
    }
}
```

### In-Editor Tools

- Components(MonoBehaviours) that has injectables will appear in `Component/Scripts/DependencyInjection`
- `Injector` component has two buttons `Validate Dependencies` and `Clear All Injectable Fields`.

## Service Locator

### Context

Inversion of Control is a way to decouple dependencies of services everytime a MonoBehaviour is trying to access them in the context of Unity. No need to manually link game objects together. Leave the automation process to Service Locator.

### Service Locator Core Modules

- `ServiceLocator` finds services for both the scene and global useage.
  1. It acts as a singleton for both global and scenes depends on configuration.
  2. The configurations check if other `ServiceLocator` is already registered in the scene and global, if so it does not create a new one.
  3. For scene level `ServiceLocator` it will go through all root game objects to find one if it's not registered in the container.
  4. Menu Items added under `GameObject/ServiceLocator/`. Both service locator variants can be added to the scene.
- `Bootstrapper` initializes services on `Awake()`.
  1. `GlobalBootstrapper` and `SceneBootstrapper` inherits from `Bootstrapper`. Each overrides `Bootstrap()` to call respective configurations and inistantiate instances on `Awake()`.
  2. `GlobalBootstrapper` has additional configuration for persistent singleton if `dontDestoryOnLoad` is set to `true`;
- `ServiceManager` Registers and gets services when needed.
  1. Both `Register` overloads go through the service type's registration and type check.
  2. Both `Get` and `TryGet` do registration and type check before return specified type of service.

### Mock Serviecs

| Interface | Class | Description |
|--|--|--|
| `ILocalization` | `MockLocalization` | Mocks a method `GetLocalizedWord()` that takes a word and get translation of another language. |
| `ISerializer` | `MockSerializer` | Mocks a method `Serialize()` to serialize objects. |
| `IAuthentication`| `MockAuthentication` | Mocks a method `Login()` to login user. Note: It's a `MonoBehaviour`. |
| `IGameService`| `MockGameService` | Mocks a method `StartGame()` to run the game. |

### Test Scenes

- Register Services
  
Inside `MainScene`, a `Player` object registers for global, scene and self scale services. Registration is done in `Awake()`
Note: MockAuthentication is a MonoBehaviour. In this case, GameObjectExtension `GetOrAdd` is used to instantiate it.

```csharp
ServiceLocator.Global.Register<IGameService>(_gameService = new MockGameService());
            ServiceLocator.ForSceneOf(this).Register<ILocalization>(_localization = new MockLocalization());
            ServiceLocator.For(this).Register<ISerializer>(_serializer = new MockSerializer());
            ServiceLocator.ForSceneOf(this)
                .Register<IAuthentication>(_authentication = gameObject.GetOrAdd<MockAuthentication>());
```

- Get Services

```csharp
ServiceLocator.For(this)
                .Get(out _serializer)
                .Get(out _localization)
                .Get(out _gameService)
                .Get(out _authentication);
```

After getting services, we can call any service methods however we want.

### Known Issues

- SubScenes do not recognize `ServiceLocator` Scene or global. Might worth looking at if subscene is used in the project.
- Loading multiple scenes at the same time `SceneServiceLocator` notice multiple instances, they should only be aware of the ones within the scene.

## Class Extensions

Unity `Object` and its inheritance classes can have extension methods to expand the generalized functionality not implemented officially by Unity Engine developers.

### Code Snippet

Disable all children inside the hierarchy of a game object but keep the parrent active.

- Definition

```csharp
using UnityEngine;

public static class GameObjectExtensions{
    public static void DisableChildren(this GameObject gameObject) {
        for(var i=0; i<gameObject.transform.childCount; i++){
            gameObject.transform.GetChild(i).SetActive(false);
        }
    }
}
```

- Usage in the test scene

```csharp
public class DisableChildrenTest : MonoBehaviour
{
    void Start()
    {
        GameObject parent = new(name: "Parent");

        for (var i = 0; i < 5; i++)
        {
            GameObject child = new($"Child{i}");
            child.transform.parent = parent.transform;
        }
        
        parent.DisableChildren();
    }
}
```

While in play mode a GameObject named `Parent` is spawned and all it's children are disabled in the inspector.

## Credits

[Unity Dependency Injection Lite](https://github.com/adammyhre/Unity-Dependency-Injection-Lite/tree/master) from [adammyhre](https://github.com/adammyhre)

[Unity Service Locator](https://github.com/adammyhre/Unity-Service-Locator) from [adammyhre](https://github.com/adammyhre)
